DOCS-767: Document installing and configuring the ODrive module and its two resource types (#1446)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/extend/modular-resources/examples/odrive.md

See [add an `odrive_config_file`](#add-an-odrive_config_file) for more information.

This option is not recommend for the `odrive-canbus` model.

{{% /alert %}}

Note that `iq_msg_rate_ms` in the `odrive_config_file` defaults to `0`, and you must set this to or around `100` to use the [motor API's `SetPower` method](https://docs.viam.com/components/motor/#setpower).

2. Follow [this guide](https://docs.odriverobotics.com/v/latest/control.html#control-doc) to tune your ODrive motor.

3. See the [ODrive CAN documentation](https://docs.odriverobotics.com/v/latest/can-guide.html) for detailed information on how to set up CAN on your ODrive.

{{% alert title="Tip" color="tip" %}}

If you are using a Raspberry Pi as your [board](/components/board/), you must run `sudo ip link set can0 up type can bitrate <baud_rate>` in your terminal to receive CAN messages.
See "[Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting): [CAN Link Issues](https://github.com/viamrobotics/odrive#can-link-issues)" for more information.

Additionally, make sure you have [enabled SPI communication on your Pi](/installation/prepare/rpi-setup/) to use several common CANHats.

{{% /alert %}}

> 1. Make sure your ODrive is connected to your [board](/components/board/) as follows, depending on your preferred connection method:

Author: ```suggestion
4. Make sure your ODrive is connected to your [board](/components/board/) as follows, depending on your preferred connection method:
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="JSON Template" %}}

```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
"modules": [
  {
    "name": "odrive",
    "executable_path": "<your/path/to/odrive/odrive-motor/run.sh>"
  }
]
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

### Modular Resource

Go to your robot's page on the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com/).
Navigate to the **Config** tab on your robot's page, and click on the **Components** subtab.
Select **Raw JSON** mode.

Copy and paste the following JSON along with your module JSON depending on your preferred communication type:

{{< tabs name="Add an ODrive motor">}}
{{% tab name="odrive-serial" %}}

```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
{
  // "modules": [ {"name": "odrive" ...  } ] MODULE JSON
  "components": [
    {
      "model": "viam:motor:odrive-serial",
      "namespace": "rdk",
      "attributes": {
      },
      "depends_on": [],
      "type": "motor",
      "name": "<your-odrive-motor>"
    }
  ]
}
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="odrive-canbus" %}}

```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
{

>   // "modules": [ {"name": "odrive" ...  } ]

Author: ```suggestion
  // "modules": [ {"name": "odrive" ...  } ] MODULE JSON
```

Save the config.
Check the [**Logs** tab](/program/debug/) of your robot in the Viam app to make sure your ODrive motor has connected and no errors are being raised.

{{% alert title="Tip" color="tip" %}}

The `"odrive-canbus"` type allows you to connect multiple ODrives without providing a `serial_number` as long as you have not defined any `odrive_config_file` once the drive has been configured with `odrivetool`.

{{% /alert %}}

#### Add an `odrive_config_file`

To add an `odrive_config_file` and reconfigure your ODrive natively each time the motor is initialized on the robot, use [`odrivetool`](https://docs.odriverobotics.com/v/latest/odrivetool.html) to extract your configuration from your ODrive:

1. Run `odrivetool backup-config config.json` to extract your configs to a file called `config.json`.
See the [ODrive documentation](https://docs.odriverobotics.com/v/latest/odrivetool.html#configuration-backup) for more info.

> 1. `iq_msg_rate_ms` in the config defaults to `0`.

Author: ```suggestion
2. `iq_msg_rate_ms` in the config defaults to `0`.
```

You must set this to or around `100` to use the [motor API's `SetPower` method](https://docs.viam.com/components/motor/#setpower).

> 1. If you add an `odrive_config_file` to an `odrive-canbus` motor, you will have to leave the serial connection established with your ODrive plugged in to the USB port, in addition to wiring the CANH and CANL pins.

Author: ```suggestion
3. If you add an `odrive_config_file` to an `odrive-canbus` motor, you will have to leave the serial connection established with your ODrive plugged in to the USB port, in addition to wiring the CANH and CANL pins.
```

{{% alert title="Tip" color="tip" %}}

If you are using a Raspberry Pi as your [board](/components/board/), you must run `sudo ip link set can0 up type can bitrate <baud_rate>` in your terminal to receive CAN messages.
See [Troubleshooting](#can-link-issues) for more information.

Additionally, make sure you have [enabled SPI communication on your Pi](/installation/prepare/rpi-setup/) to use several common CANHats.

{{% /alert %}}

4. Make sure your ODrive is connected to your [board](/components/board/) as follows, depending on your preferred connection method:

{{< tabs name="Connect your ODrive">}}
{{% tab name="odrive-serial" %}}

Plug the [USB Isolator for Odrive](https://odriverobotics.com/shop/usb-c-to-usb-a-cable-and-usb-isolator) into a USB port on your board.
Plug a USB-C to USB-A cable from the isolator to the ODrive.

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="odrive-canbus" %}}

Wire the CANH and CANL pins from your board to your ODrive.
Refer to your board and the [ODrive's pinout](https://docs.odriverobotics.com/v/latest/pinout.html) diagrams for the location of these pins.

> You must make a serial connection to set up your ODrive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You must make a serial connection to set up your ODrive. If CAN chains together multiple ODrives, only one must have this serial connection.
```

Reviewer 2: yep that's correct

| `serial_number` | string | Optional | The serial number of the ODrive. Note that this is not necessary if you only have one ODrive connected. See [Troubleshooting](#hanging) for help finding this value. |
| `canbus_baud_rate` | string | Optional | [Baud rate](https://docs.odriverobotics.com/v/latest/can-guide.html#setting-up-the-odrive) of the ODrive CAN protocol. This attribute is only available for `"odrive-canbus"` connections. </br> Use [`odrivetool`](https://docs.odriverobotics.com/v/latest/odrivetool.html) to obtain this value with `<odrv>.can.config.baud_rate`. Format the string as a multiple of 1000 (k). <br> Example: `"250k"` |

Save the config.
Check the [**Logs** tab](/program/debug/) of your robot in the Viam app to make sure your ODrive motor has connected and no errors are being raised.

{{% alert title="Tip" color="tip" %}}

> The `"odrive-canbus"` type allows you to connect multiple ODrives without providing a `serial_number` as long as you have not defined any `odrive_config_file`.

Reviewer: @martha-johnston is this true as long as they provide a canbus node id and set them up beforehand?

Reviewer 2: yes, but I would maybe add "once the odrive has been configured using odrivetool" or something like that. because they do have to set it up separately to not use these attributes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `"odrive-canbus"` type allows you to connect multiple ODrives without providing a `serial_number` as long as you have not defined any `odrive_config_file`, once the drive has been configured using odrivetool.
```

4. If you add an `odrive_config_file` to an `odrive-canbus` motor, you will have to leave the serial connection established with your ODrive plugged in to the USB port, in addition to wiring the CANH and CANL pins.

An alternative to adding an `odrive_config_file` is running the command `odrivetool restore-config /path/to/config.json` in your terminal.

## Troubleshooting

### Unstable Behavior

- The motor is likely not properly tuned.
See the [ODrive documentation](https://docs.odriverobotics.com/v/latest/control.html) for instructions on how to tune.

### Hanging

- If you have provided a serial number, make sure it is the correct serial number.
ODrives have 2 serial numbers: one that will be printed out when you start `odrivetool`, and one that can be accessed in `odrivetool` by running `odrv0.serial_number`.
The correct serial number is the one that is printed out when you start `odrivetool`.
- If you have not provided a serial number or you are sure you have provided the correct serial number, you are likely connected to the ODrive elsewhere.

> Make sure any connections via Python, `odrivetool` or the GUI are closed.

Author: ```suggestion
Make sure any connections through Python, `odrivetool` or the GUI are closed.
```

---
title: "Add an ODrive motor as a Modular Resource"
linkTitle: "ODrive"
weight: 40
type: "docs"

> description: "How to add an ODrive motor with serial or canbus as a modular resource of your robot."

Reviewer 2: "serial or canbus communication"

Author: done!

tags: ["motor", "odrive", "canbus", "serial", "module", "modular resources", "Python", "python SDK"]
# SMEs: Kim, Martha, Rand
---

> The [Viam GitHub](https://github.com/viamrobotics/odrive) provides an implementation of ODrive Robotics' [ODrive S1](https://odriverobotics.com/shop/odrive-s1) motor driver as a modular resource [extending](/extend/modular-resources/) the [motor API](/components/motor#API).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The [Odrive S1 Modular Component repository](https://github.com/viamrobotics/odrive) provides an implementation of ODrive Robotics' [ODrive S1](https://odriverobotics.com/shop/odrive-s1) motor driver as a modular resource [extending](/extend/modular-resources/) the [motor API](/components/motor#API).
```

Author: done

[Prepare](#prepare-your-odrive) your ODrive and [download](#requirements) and [configure](#configuration) the module to add an `odrive-serial` or `odrive-canbus` [motor](/components/motor/) {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="resource" text="resource" >}} to your robot.

{{% alert title="Note" color="note" %}}

This module is only implemented for use with the [Viam Python SDK](https://python.viam.dev/).
The methods other SDKs provide for the [motor API](/components/motor#API) will not work with this module.

{{% /alert %}}

### Prepare your ODrive

1. Read through the [ODrive documentation](https://docs.odriverobotics.com/v/latest/getting-started.html) to wire, calibrate, and configure your ODrive natively.

{{% alert title="Tip" color="tip" %}}

This configuration remains on the same ODrive motor controller across reboots, and only changes when you go through the configuration of the ODrive again.

> To set the native configuration dynamically, find and copy the path to the motor's `config.json` file to provide in configuration as the attribute `"odrive_config_file"`.

Reviewer 2: I believe there's instructions on how to do this in the README, but I don't actually think you can "find" the config file. I'm pretty sure you have to run `odrivetool backup-config /path/to/where/config.json`

Reviewer 2: also, we should probably emphasize that adding the file in the config as `"odrive_config_file"` is completely optional (and honestly not ideal for canbus implementations because then there still has to be a serial connection to use the config file as expected)

Author: Ok sounds good to me

> See the [Viam Github](https://github.com/viamrobotics/odrive/tree/main/sample-configs) for an example of this file.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
See the [Odrive S1 Modular Component repository](https://github.com/viamrobotics/odrive/tree/main/sample-configs) for an example of this file.
```

{{% alert title="Tip" color="tip" %}}

If you are using a Raspberry Pi as your [board](/components/board/), you must run `sudo ip link set can0 up type can bitrate <baud_rate>` in your terminal to receive CAN messages.
See [Troubleshooting](#can-link-issues) for more information.

Additionally, make sure you have [enabled SPI communication on your Pi](/installation/prepare/rpi-setup/) to use several common CANHats.

{{% /alert %}}

4. Make sure your ODrive is connected to your [board](/components/board/) as follows, depending on your preferred connection method:

{{< tabs name="Connect your ODrive">}}
{{% tab name="odrive-serial" %}}

Plug the [USB Isolator for Odrive](https://odriverobotics.com/shop/usb-c-to-usb-a-cable-and-usb-isolator) into a USB port on your board.
Plug a USB-C to USB-A cable from the isolator to the ODrive.

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="odrive-canbus" %}}

Wire the CANH and CANL pins from your board to your ODrive.
Refer to your board and the [ODrive's pinout](https://docs.odriverobotics.com/v/latest/pinout.html) diagrams for the location of these pins.

> You will have already made a serial connection to set up your ODrive.

Author: This makes sense, was tricky. Think this change to line 65 is an improvement?

> After setting up the ODrive, if you wish to use the `odrive-canbus` model, you can either leave the serial connection plugged in or remove it and leave only the CANH and CANL pins wired.

Reviewer 2: or maybe here is the best place to note that if you want to unplug the serial connection and only use the CAN pins, you can't have an `"odrive_config_file"` in the viam config

Author: Done!

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

After preparing your ODrive, download and configure the module to configure `odrive-serial` or `odrive-canbus` model motors on your robot.

## Requirements

On your robot's computer, clone the [Viam ODrive module](https://github.com/viamrobotics/odrive):

``` {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
git clone https://github.com/viamrobotics/odrive.git
```

Install `python-can`, `cantools`, and the [Python `viam-sdk`](https://python.viam.dev/):

``` {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
pip3 install python-can cantools viam-sdk
```

Follow [these instructions](https://docs.odriverobotics.com/v/latest/odrivetool.html) to install `odrivetool`.

> Find and copy the path to `run.sh` on your robot's computer to provide in configuration.

Reviewer 2: "...to `run.sh` from the cloned Viam ODrive repo on your robot's..."

{{% alert title="Tip" color="tip" %}}

Navigate to the `odrive/odrive-motor` directory of the ODrive module you cloned on a Terminal session with your computer and run `pwd` to obtain the path to `run.sh` on your robot's computer.

``` {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cd <your/path/to/odrive/odrive-motor>
pwd
```

{{% /alert %}}

## Configuration

### Module

{{< tabs name="Add the ODrive module">}}
{{% tab name="Config Builder" %}}

Go to your robot's page on the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com/).
Navigate to the **Config** tab on your robot's page, and click on the **Modules** subtab.

Add the ODrive module with a name of your choice and the executable path that points to the location where your ODrive module’s run script, <file>run.sh</file>, is stored on your robot’s computer.

> ![The ODrive module with the name "odrive" and executable path "<your/path/to/run.sh>" added to a robot in the Viam app config builder](../../img/add-odrive/add-odrive-module-ui.png)

Author: np should be fixed!

In **Model**, enter either `viam:motor:odrive-serial` or `viam:motor:odrive-canbus`, depending on your preferred connection method.
A warning tooltip will appear explaining this model is not built-in to the RDK, so it is not recognized by Viam and won't have validation features.

![The ODrive motor component in the serial model being added as a component with name "your-odrive-serial" in the Viam app config builder](../../img/add-odrive/add-odrive-resource-ui.png)

Click **Create component**.
Edit and fill in the attributes as applicable to your model of ODrive.

![The ODrive motor component in the serial model with example configuration attributes pasted in the Viam app config builder](../../img/add-odrive/add-odrive-attributes-ui.png)

tab -->

Go to your robot's page on the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com/).
Navigate to the **Config** tab on your robot's page, and click on the **Components** subtab.
Select **Raw JSON** mode.

Copy and paste the following JSON depending on your preferred communication type:

{{< tabs name="Add an ODrive motor">}}
{{% tab name="odrive-serial" %}}

```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}

> //  < INSERT YOUR ODRIVE MODULE CONFIG >

Reviewer 3: Is this missing a curly brace? the others have an opening curly brace

  "components": [
    {
      "model": "viam:motor:odrive-serial",
      "namespace": "rdk",

>       "attributes": {

Author: @npentrel I started on this and realized it might not be good as Rand and Martha have notes to discourage use of the optional attributes for the most part (excluding the use cases they're built for) other than the canbus for can. Specifying a serial number or config file path could actually make the odrive resource flakier for users if I understand correctly

>       "attributes": {

Reviewer 2: yeah it is kind of an interesting situation. for serial, there's really no harm in using the optional attributes such as serial number and config file, because the odrive has to be plugged in over usb for the serial implementation to work at all. basically, we want to make it clear that for the can model, ideally you would only use the can node id, and set everything up before hand so that the serial numbers and config files aren't necessary, but for the serial model it doesn't actually really matter

      },
      "depends_on": [],
      "type": "motor",
      "name": "<your-odrive-motor>"
    }
  ]
}
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="odrive-canbus" %}}

```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}

> //  < INSERT YOUR ODRIVE MODULE CONFIG >

Author: Fair enough will do

> //  < INSERT YOUR ODRIVE MODULE CONFIG >

Author: Updated but I think the way I did it looks a little off still because of trying to make sure users don't copy/paste module code 2x--- lmk what you think

> //  < INSERT YOUR ODRIVE MODULE CONFIG >

Reviewer 3: ok then keep as you had it

    {
      "model": "viam:motor:odrive-canbus",
      "namespace": "rdk",
      "attributes": {
        "canbus_node_id": <int>,
      },
      "depends_on": [],
      "type": "motor",
      "name": "<your-odrive-motor>"
    }
  ]
}
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="JSON Example" %}}

```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
{
  "modules": [
    {
      "name": "odrive",
      "executable_path": "/path/to/run.sh"
    }
  ],
  "components": [
    {
      "model": "viam:motor:odrive-canbus",
      "namespace": "rdk",
      "attributes": {
        "canbus_node_id": 0,
        "odrive_config_file": "/path/to/first/config.json",
        "serial_number": "NUM0001"
      },
      "depends_on": [],
      "type": "motor",
      "name": "odrive-motor"
    },
    {
      "model": "viam:motor:odrive-canbus",
      "namespace": "rdk",
      "attributes": {
        "canbus_node_id": 2,
        "odrive_config_file": "/path/to/second/config.json",
        "serial_number": "NUM0002"
      },
      "depends_on": [],
      "type": "motor",
      "name": "odrive-motor-2"
    }
  ]
}
```

Edit and fill in the attributes as applicable to your model of ODrive.

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

> The following attributes are available for the motor resources available in the Viam ODrive module:

Reviewer: So, this module has two models with two different config files in the larger ODrive module, I think we should make that clear.

Author: @randhid That's a good point, didn't clearly distinguish-- trying to edit intro at least to clear that up

Reviewer: let me know when you want me to look at the intro again.

Author: @randhid It's good to re-review now!

| Name | Type | Inclusion | Description |
| ---- | ---- | --------- | ----------- |
| `canbus_node_id` | int | Optional | Required for successful initialization of the `"odrive-canbus"` type. <br> Node ID of the CAN node you would like to use. You configured this when [setting up your ODrive](https://docs.odriverobotics.com/v/latest/can-guide.html#setting-up-the-odrive). <br> Example: `0` |
| `odrive_config_file` | string | Optional | Filepath of a separate JSON file containing your ODrive's native configuration. </br> See the [Viam Github](https://github.com/viamrobotics/odrive/tree/main/sample-configs) for an example of this file. |

> | `serial_number` | string | Optional | The serial number of the ODrive. Note that this is not necessary if you only have only ODrive connected. See [Troubleshooting](#hanging) for help finding this value. |

Reviewer 2: "...if you only have **_one_** Odrive connected."

| `canbus_baud_rate` | string | Optional | [Baud rate](https://docs.odriverobotics.com/v/latest/can-guide.html#setting-up-the-odrive) of the ODrive CAN protocol. This attribute is only available for `"odrive-canbus"` connections. </br> Use [`odrivetool`](https://docs.odriverobotics.com/v/latest/odrivetool.html) to obtain this value with `<odrv>.can.config.baud_rate`. Format the string as a multiple of 1000 (k). <br> Example: `"250k"` |

Save the config.

> Check the **Logs** tab of your robot in the Viam app to make sure your ODrive motor has connected and no errors are being raised.

Reviewer 3: This is a good callout - can you add a link to the logs tab to the docs page where we describe the logs tab?

Author: done

{{% alert title="Tip" color="tip" %}}

The `"odrive-canbus"` type allows you to connect multiple ODrives without providing a `serial_number` as long as you have not defined any `odrive_config_file`.

{{% /alert %}}

> ## Troubleshooting

Author: @martha-johnston @randhid would you two be good with linking to docs section from GitHub readme? Or would you recommend the other way around (linking to Git) for sync purposes?

> ## Troubleshooting

Reviewer: would you be okay with linking operational documentation to the repo for now? The modules scope plans to use the Odrive documentation standard for other modules' readmes in the near future. 

We can move things around as necessary in the future.

> ## Troubleshooting

Author: That is ok with me @randhid! @npentrel to confirm would these changes work?

> ## Troubleshooting

Reviewer 3: sure!

> ## Troubleshooting

Reviewer: perfectly okay!

{{% alert title="Tip" color="tip" %}}

If you are using a Raspberry Pi as your [board](/components/board/), you must run `sudo ip link set can0 up type can bitrate <baud_rate>` in your terminal to receive CAN messages.
See [Troubleshooting](#can-link-issues) for more information.

Additionally, make sure you have [enabled SPI communication on your Pi](/installation/prepare/rpi-setup/) to use several common CANHats.

{{% /alert %}}

4. Make sure your ODrive is connected to your [board](/components/board/) as follows, depending on your preferred connection method:

{{< tabs name="Connect your ODrive">}}
{{% tab name="odrive-serial" %}}

Plug the [USB Isolator for Odrive](https://odriverobotics.com/shop/usb-c-to-usb-a-cable-and-usb-isolator) into a USB port on your board.
Plug a USB-C to USB-A cable from the isolator to the ODrive.

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="odrive-canbus" %}}

Wire the CANH and CANL pins from your board to your ODrive.
Refer to your board and the [ODrive's pinout](https://docs.odriverobotics.com/v/latest/pinout.html) diagrams for the location of these pins.

> You will have already made a serial connection to set up your ODrive.

Author: ```suggestion
You must make a serial connection to set up your ODrive.
```
